---
layout: post
title: Ego
tags: philosophy life
---

Who are we? The thinking being behind a fragile and mortal body.
When we speak of `ego`, however, we are not referring to any of this, there is `no reference`
to our `soul`.

Ego is almost seen as a `negative` thing, a sense of `superiority`, that we have to limit to
avoid having our ideas `imposed` on others.

In fact, this isn't entirely wrong: the ego is in fact a `part of us`, the feeling that comes up
when we perceive that we have been wronged or when someone challenged ourselves.

> It's for my pride

Because of ego, we feel `superior` to others, `infallible`, and when we make mistakes
(everyone does), we tend to `deny` them and blame someone else, to not admit our `responsibility`.

An insidious demon that controls us, bringing `illusory benefits`, leading to chaos with the
illusion that it can be easy to manage.

### Back to the Future
Everyone has seen Back to the Future (`1985`), so I must bring it as an example here.
In fact, Marty McFly's ego is one of his `main characteristics`, shown several times throughout
the films, leading him to get into `trouble` over and over again.

In fact, the protagonist can't tolerate being called a `coward`, and he is ready to agree to do
a car race in order not to be considered one, risking causing a serious `accident`.

With the experience gained during the adventure, however, he manages to `contain` this `impulse`,
thus avoiding the famous accident (by pretending to be his future son).
At the `end` of the 3 films we find a very `different` Marty compared to the one at the
beginning of the story, showing remarkable `character growth`.

Of course, this allows us to continue our study of the topic.

### Dangers of ego
When ego is involved, one of the biggest risks is to notice an increase in the `problems` you
initially had, making them `worse` and `bigger`.

If we `leave` at the `beginning` of a conflict situation, no one would do anything to us, and
there would be `no long-term consequences`.
However, if in the same situation we `respond` to `provocation` and get drawn into the conflict,
our actions, which could have been avoidable, cause us to fall into the `trap` and come out deeply
wounded.

Our `pride` dragged us deeper and deeper into the `trap`, although we had at first a chance to get
out of it safely.
All because, in order to `defend it`, we took actions that made the context worse and worse and
causing it to get `out` of our `control`.

`"Control"` is the most important `keyword`, as it is through it that we `govern` our `lives`, without
which the consequences would be unpredictable, from all points of view:
- If we have no control over `ourselves`, maybe because we are under the influence of alcohol,
  we can perform `actions` that are `dangerous` to others, leading to unpleasant consequences
- If we have no control over the `situation`, we would be `under` the `control` of those who do,
  thus having to `follow` their `rules` and praying to get out of it as soon as possible

### Karl Popper
According to philosopher `Karl Popper`, who lived in the `UK` last century, `self-awareness` is what
distinguishes us from `animals`.
We know that we exist, we perceive `time` passing, and we accumulate more and more `knowledge`
throughout our `lives`.

In his conference on the `"body-mind problem"`, he defines the existence of `3` distinct `worlds`
in which each of us lives:
1. `Physical` world
2. `Subjective` world, composed of our personal thoughts and feelings
3. `Objective` knowledge

These worlds are actually closely `linked` to `each other`, and each is the consequence of the
existence of the world before it.
For example, `objective` knowledge `couldn't exist` without having tested our personal `theories`,
which over time contributed to the accumulation of objective facts, which in turn helped us to
`improve` our `techniques` that we can apply in the `physical world`.

Without `ego`, we wouldn't have the will to `question` already widespread `beliefs`, and we wouldn't
have any kind of `innovation` in the world of `objective knowledge`.
In this case it has been a good `tool` in the hands of `scientists` we now consider innovative,
as they `contradicted` all knowledge that was considered correct in their era.

This brings us to another book of the philosopher Popper, called `"The Myth of the Frame"`.
In this book we have the application of the concept of `ego` to `discussions` between `people`.

What he advocates in fact goes to `debun`k the myth that `everyone` lives in their own `bubble` of
interests and trying to discuss to `reach` a `common` point of view is impossible.
Popper believes this idea is totally `false` and, indeed, argues that discussion between people with
totally `different ideas` leads to new points of view initially `unknown` to both, and is therefore
something to be `encouraged`, not a waste of time.

In other words, according to him, we shouldn't allow our ego to forcefully affirm its point of view in
discussions, suppressing that of the opponent, but on the contrary we should `genuinely listen` to the
opinion of `others` and ask ourselves whether it `shares` any `ideas` with our own, trying to `merge`
them into a single one, `enriched` by all the opinions.

In my opinion, many people `today` aren't `willing` to open such a `dialogue`, also considering the
fact that `social networks` have increased `hate` messages directed at other people, making them
almost like a `normal` thing.
Thinking about it now, if I got into an `argument` with a person on a certain `topic`, I would
probably `pretend` to `agree` with him in order to `end` the `argument` as quickly as possible and
never have to think about it again, doing the `opposite` of what the `book` advised me, but how many
people in this situation would do something `different`?

### Ego control
As we have seen, ego can help `motivate` us to do something and push us to improve, however,
without control it can lead to `bad situations`.
The ego must be `controlled`, and succeeding in doing so isn't trivial at all, because
when it appears it tends to take control of our actions.

Therefore, we must put aside our pride and realize that we actually have `nothing special`,
behaving with complete `freedom` when we are with people whose opinion doesn't matter to us,
at the cost of being labeled "weird".
If no one knows us, there is no reputation to defend, and the next day the people who challenged us
have already forgotten everything, because we `aren't important` to them.
